.TH DS 1 "March 2026" "DeftShell 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ds \- AI-Powered Context-Aware Terminal for Developers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ds
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
DeftShell (\fBds\fR) makes your terminal intelligent, context-aware, and AI-powered.
It auto-detects project context, integrates with multiple AI providers,
intercepts dangerous commands, learns developer patterns, and provides
a plugin ecosystem.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "AI Commands"
.TP
\fBask\fR \fIquery\fR
Ask AI a question with project context.
.TP
\fBdo\fR \fIinstruction\fR
AI generates and executes commands from natural language.
.TP
\fBhow\fR \fIquestion\fR
Get project-aware how-to instructions.
.TP
\fBexplain\fR
Explain piped command output.
.TP
\fBreview\fR
Review piped code changes.
.TP
\fBchat\fR [\fB--continue\fR] [\fB--context\fR \fIfile\fR]
Interactive AI chat mode.
.TP
\fBgenerate\fR \fItype\fR [\fIname\fR]
AI code generation (component, migration, test, dockerfile, github-action).
.SS "Context & Project Commands"
.TP
\fBcontext\fR [\fIaction\fR]
Show detected project context. Actions: refresh, export, diff.
.TP
\fBscripts\fR
List project scripts detected from package.json, Makefile, etc.
.TP
\fBrun\fR \fIscript\fR
Run a project script.
.TP
\fBworkspace\fR [\fIaction\fR]
Monorepo workspace commands. Actions: list.
.TP
\fBenv\fR
Display environment context information.
.SS "Automation"
.TP
\fBrunbook\fR \fIaction\fR
Runbook management. Actions: new, edit, delete, list, show, run, record, stop, generate, search, install, publish, trending.
.TP
\fBalias\fR [\fIaction\fR]
Manage context-aware aliases. Actions: add, remove, list.
.SS "Configuration & Auth"
.TP
\fBconfig\fR [\fIaction\fR]
Configuration management. Actions: get, set, reset, validate, path, export, import, ui.
.TP
\fBauth\fR \fIaction\fR
AI provider authentication. Actions: status, revoke, <provider>.
.TP
\fBprivacy\fR \fImode\fR
Toggle privacy mode (on/off). Routes AI through local models.
.SS "Diagnostics"
.TP
\fBstats\fR [\fIperiod\fR]
Analytics dashboard. Periods: today, week, project, commands, errors, ai.
.TP
\fBusage\fR
AI usage and cost tracking.
.TP
\fBdoctor\fR [\fB--verbose\fR]
Diagnose issues with DeftShell setup.
.TP
\fBversion\fR
Show version information.
.SS "Setup"
.TP
\fBinit\fR \fIshell\fR
Generate shell initialization script (zsh, bash, fish).
.TP
\fBcompletions\fR \fIshell\fR
Generate shell completions (zsh, bash, fish).
.TP
\fBupdate\fR [\fB--channel\fR \fIchannel\fR] [\fB--check\fR]
Self-update. Channels: stable, beta, nightly.
.TP
\fBplugin\fR \fIaction\fR
Plugin management. Actions: list, install, remove, update, create, search, enable, disable, info.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
\fB--provider\fR \fIname\fR
Override AI provider for this command.
.TP
\fB-y\fR, \fB--yes\fR
Auto-confirm all prompts.
.TP
\fB--dry-run\fR
Show what would be done without executing.
.TP
\fB--output\fR \fIfile\fR
Write output to a file.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Global configuration is stored in \fB~/.deftshell/config.toml\fR.
Project-level overrides go in \fB.deftshell.toml\fR in the project root.
.PP
See \fBds config path\fR for the config file location.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBDS_LOG_LEVEL\fR
Override log level (trace, debug, info, warn, error).
.TP
\fBANTHROPIC_API_KEY\fR
Anthropic Claude API key.
.TP
\fBOPENAI_API_KEY\fR
OpenAI API key.
.TP
\fBGEMINI_API_KEY\fR
Google Gemini API key.
.TP
\fBGITHUB_COPILOT_TOKEN\fR
GitHub Copilot token.
.TP
\fBAWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID\fR, \fBAWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY\fR
AWS credentials for Bedrock.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB~/.deftshell/config.toml\fR
Global configuration file.
.TP
\fB~/.deftshell/db.sqlite\fR
Command history and analytics database.
.TP
\fB~/.deftshell/runbooks/\fR
Runbook storage directory.
.TP
\fB~/.deftshell/plugins/\fR
Installed plugins directory.
.TP
\fB.deftshell.toml\fR
Project-level configuration (in project root).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Ask AI about your project:
.RS
ds ask "how do I run the tests?"
.RE
.PP
Generate and execute a command:
.RS
ds do "find all files larger than 10MB"
.RE
.PP
Start interactive chat:
.RS
ds chat
.RE
.PP
Create and run a deployment runbook:
.RS
ds runbook new deploy
.br
ds runbook run deploy --var env=staging
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
DeftShell Contributors
.SH LICENSE
MIT License
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgit\fR(1), \fBdocker\fR(1), \fBcargo\fR(1)
